NE-705: IngressController subnet selection in AWS (#1595)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/ingress/lb-subnet-selection-aws.md

---
title: lb-subnet-selection-aws
authors:
  - "@gcs278"
reviewers:
  - "@candita"
  - "@frobware"
  - "@rfredette"
  - "@alebedev87"
  - "@JoelSpeed, for review regarding CCM"
approvers:
  - "@Miciah"
api-approvers:
  - "@deads2k"
creation-date: 2024-03-06
last-updated: 2024-03-29
tracking-link: # link to the tracking ticket (for example: Jira Feature or Epic ticket) that corresponds to this enhancement
  - https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NE-705
see-also:
replaces:
superseded-by:
---

# LoadBalancer Subnet Selection for AWS

## Summary

This enhancement extends the IngressController API to allow a cluster admin to

> specify custom subnets for the load balancer in AWS. By default, AWS auto-discovers
> the subnets and logic for tie breaking if there are multiple subnets per availability
> zone. This enhancement will configure the `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets`

Reviewer: I think there is a word missing here.  
```suggestion
specify custom subnets for the load balancer in AWS. By default, AWS auto-discovers
the subnets and has logic for tie breaking if there are multiple subnets per availability
zone. This enhancement will configure the `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets`
```
Or maybe this:
```suggestion
specify custom subnets for the load balancer in AWS. By default, AWS auto-discovers
the subnets, with logic to break ties when there are multiple subnets for a particular availability
zone. This enhancement will configure the `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets`
```

annotation on the IngressController's LoadBalancer-type service which will manually
configure the subnets for each availability zone.

## Motivation

Cluster admins on AWS may have dedicated subnets for their load balancers due to
security reasons, architecture, or infrastructure constraints. Currently, cluster
admins can manually add the `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets`
annotation to the service. However, this approach is considered bad practice since
the service is managed by the Ingress Operator. Additionally, the annotation must
be added after the LoadBalancer-type service has already been created by the Ingress
Operator. This means that an Ingress Controller may initially be deployed in a broken

> state. Cluster admins need an API for the Ingress Controller which will populate this
> annotation simultaneously with the creation of LoadBalancer-type Services.

Reviewer: The motivation should mention the install-time aspect.  
```suggestion
state. Cluster admins need an API for the Ingress Controller which will populate this
annotation simultaneously with the creation of LoadBalancer-type Services,
and cluster admins likewise need an install-time option in order to be able to
successfully launch a cluster that has requirements around subnets.  
```

_"As a cluster admin, I want to migrate an IngressController LoadBalancer-type
service, currently using an unmanaged service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets
annotation, to using the new IngressController API field so that the annotation is now
managed."_

A cluster admin manually set the `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets` annotation,
and now wishes to upgrade to OpenShift v4.y to use new IngressController API field,
`spec.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.providerParameters.aws.subnets`.

1. Cluster admin confirms that initially `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets`
   is set on the LoadBalancer-type service managed by the IngressController.
2. The cluster admin upgrades OpenShift to v4.y and the annotation is not
   changed or removed.
3. From now on, the cluster admin uses `spec.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.providerParameters.aws.subnets`
   to adjust the ingress controller subnets.

#### Day 1 Load Balancer Subnet Selection on AWS

_"As a cluster admin, when installing a cluster in AWS, I want to specify the subnet
selection for the default Ingress Controller's load balancer."_

> TODO: List steps for this user story

Reviewer: Would it make sense to have a user story for private clusters?  Something like this:  _As a cluster admin, when installing a private cluster in AWS, I want to specify that the default IngressController should use private subnets, so that it is not exposed to the public Internet._

Author: Done.

### Goals

- Introduce a new field in the IngressController API for subnet selection in AWS.
- Support an install-time (Day 1) configuration for subnet selection of the default
  ingress controller.
- Support migration from an unmanaged `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets`

>   annotation to using the new API field.

Reviewer: Please state up front (here, and perhaps in the summary as well) that the option will work for both classic ELBs and NLBs.  

- Support the new API field for both classic ELBs and NLBs.

### Non-Goals

> - Extend support to platforms other than AWS.

Reviewer: Presumably this is a non-goal as well, right?

- Automatically configure subnets for private clusters.

Reviewer: Also:

- Extend the feature to ALBs or the AWS Load Balancer Operator (which already has API for subnet configuration).

## Proposal

### Ingress Controller API Proposal

The `IngressController` API is extended by adding an optional parameter `Subnets`
of type `[]string` to the `AWSLoadBalancerParameters` struct, to manage the
`service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets` annotation on the
LoadBalancer-type service.

The `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets` annotation is used
for both Classic Load Balancers (CLBs) and Network Load Balancers (NLBs), hence

> adding it to `AWSLoadBalancerParameters` enable common configuration for both.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
adding it to `AWSLoadBalancerParameters` enables common configuration for both.
```

service, currently using an unmanaged service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets
annotation, to using the new IngressController API field so that the annotation is now
managed."_

A cluster admin manually set the `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets` annotation,
and now wishes to OpenShift v4.17 to use new IngressController API field, `spec.TBD`.

1. Cluster admin confirms that initially `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets` is set on the load
   balancer-type service managed by the IngressController.
2. The cluster admin upgrades OpenShift to v4.17 and the annotation is not removed or changed.
3. The cluster admin sets `spec.TBD` on the IngressController to the same value as their annotation,
   and the annotation is unchanged, but now is managed by the Ingress Controller.
4. From now on, the cluster admin uses `spec.TBD` to adjust the ingress controller subnets.

### Goals

- Introduce a new field in the IngressController API for subnet selection in AWS for Day 2 operations.
- Support migration from an unmanaged `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets` annotation to using the
  new API field.

### Non-Goals

> - Support an install-time (Day 1) option for subnet selection of the default ingress controller.

Reviewer: Need to check with Service Delivery to verify that this should be a non-goal.

Author: Yes thanks - will do. I put it as an open question too.

Author: I posted the question on the RFE and the Epic, set the "Service Delivery Architecture Overview" and "PM Sync" Check box on the Epic, and I'll bring up the question on our PM Monday call.

But what's the right mechanism to get an answer from SD?

Author: Nvm, I got an answer. Service Delivery needs it as an install time option.

Reviewer: For future reference, the usual way to request review from SD is to edit the epic, go to the "Escalation" tab, look under the "Discussion Needed" group, and check the "Service Delivery Architecture Overview" checkbox.

  `spec.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.providerParameters.aws.subnets` specified.
2. The ingress operator reconciles the LoadBalancer Service and sets the
   `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets` annotation with the subnets provided by the user.

### API Extensions

This proposal will modify the `IngressController` API by adding a new
field called `Subnets` of type `[]string` to the `AWSLoadBalancerParameters`
struct type.

TODO: What will install-time option modify?

### Topology Considerations

#### Hypershift / Hosted Control Planes

This enhancement is directly enabling the https://issues.redhat.com/browse/XCMSTRAT-545
feature for ROSA Hosted Control Planes.

#### Standalone Clusters

Standalone Clusters impact TBD

#### Single-node Deployments or MicroShift

This proposal does not have any special implications for single-node
deployments or MicroShift.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

The Ingress Operator will use value of `spec.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.providerParameters.aws.subnets`
to set the `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets` annotation

> on the LoadBalancer-type Service created by the ingress controller.

Reviewer: @gcs278, can you add a note to call out explicitly that although this is consistent with what we did for `allowedSourceRanges`, this does constitute a divergence from earlier logic?  And note the reason we are doing it this way, namely that `status` should reflect the _actual_ status, and we do anticipate that the cluster-admin may have set the annotation manually (even though that isn't a supported operation).

Author: Yes sure. I talked a bit about `allowedSourceRanges` in the alternatives, but no problem with bringing it up here.

> namely that status should reflect the actual status

I'm confused here, do you mean spec? With `allowedSourceRanges`, the status should reflect the effective value on the Service. But the spec sometimes does not (when you remove `allowedSourceRanges` it doesn't clear `spec.loadBalancerSourceRanges`). Is that what you are trying to point out? I may be confused.

Author: Ah nvm, after our slack convo I think get it. The  https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/blob/master/enhancements/ingress/mutable-publishing-scope.md#as-a-cluster-administrator-i-want-my-default-ingresscontroller-to-be-private-internal proposal only set `status.endpointPublishingStrategy...` when the IC was created or service was recreated, which means it's not always reflecting the the effective value on the Service.

Author: Done.

is updated on an existing IngressController, the Ingress Operator will NOT
update `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets` until the
cluster admin deletes the LoadBalancer-type service as instructed by the
`LoadBalancerProgressing` status (see [Effectuating Subnet Updates](#effectuating-subnet-updates)).
When the Ingress Operator recreates the LoadBalancer-type service, it will
then configure `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets` with
the new `Subnets` value.

The `status.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.providerParameters.aws.subnets`
will eventually reflect the configured subnet value by mirroring the value of
`service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets` on the service. There are
two scenarios in which the `Subnets` status won't be equal to the `Subnets` spec:

1. The cluster admin manually configured the `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets`
   annotation on the service.
2. The cluster admin configured the IngressController's `Subnets` spec, but hasn't
   effectuated the change by deleting the service (see [Effectuating Subnet Updates](#effectuating-subnet-updates)).

> Note that updating the status with admin instructions is consistent with the approach in [LoadBalancer Allowed Source Ranges](/enhancements/ingress/lb-allowed-source-ranges.md),
> but diverges with [Ingress Mutable Publishing Scope](/enhancements/ingress/mutable-publishing-scope.md).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For both of these options, the proposed design solution (to update the status with admin instructions) is consistent with the approach in [LoadBalancer Allowed Source Ranges](/enhancements/ingress/lb-allowed-source-ranges.md),
but diverges with the approach in [Ingress Mutable Publishing Scope](/enhancements/ingress/mutable-publishing-scope.md).
```

Reviewer 2: Almost.

> The mutable publishing scope design set `status.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.scope`
> to the initial value of `spec.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.scope` so that it could

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Ingress Mutable Publishing Scope design sets `status.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.scope`
to the **initial** value of `spec.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.scope` so that it could
```

> detect when the spec for `Scope` changed. Therefore, `status.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.scope`

Reviewer 2: This doesn't explain how this approach allows "detection of the change".  You'd have to explain that, or omit the sentence because it doesn't add anything.  I prefer omitting it.

> detect when the spec for `Scope` changed. Therefore, `status.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.scope`
> may not always reflect the actual scope of the load balancer. This proposal for `Subnets`

Reviewer 2: This doesn't explain how this approach allows "detection of the change".   I would just say this:
```suggestion
The Ingress Mutable Publishing Scope doesn't update `status.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.scope` until <explain it here>.
This proposal for `Subnets`
```

> perpetuates the pattern of ensuring that `status.endpointPublishingStrategy` reflects the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
perpetuates the Load Balancer Allowed Subnets pattern, which ensures that `status.endpointPublishingStrategy` reflects the
```

> _actual_ value (in our case, the annotation value).

Reviewer 2: Is this what you mean?
```suggestion
_actual_ value (in our case, the value in the spec).
```

Reviewer 2: Ok, I made another suggestion.

### Workflow Description

#### Creating a Custom IngressController with Subnets after Installation Workflow

Creating an IngressController while specifying the subnets for the LoadBalancer-type
service after installation:

1. A cluster admin creates an IngressController with
  `spec.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.providerParameters.aws.subnets` specified.
2. The ingress operator creates the LoadBalancer-type Service and sets the
   `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets` annotation with the subnets
   provided by the user.

#### Updating an existing IngressController with new Subnets Workflow

Updating an existing IngressController with new subnets requires the service
to be deleted and is disruptive:

1. A cluster admin edits an IngressController's
   `spec.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.providerParameters.aws.subnets` field.
2. The Ingress Operator sets the `LoadBalancerProgressing` condition to `Status: True`
   on the IngressController and adds status a message directing the cluster admin

>    that to delete the service.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   to delete the service.
```

Author: Done.

service annotation to `spec.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.providerParameters.aws.subnets`
after upgrading to 4.y doesn't require a cluster admin to delete the LoadBalancer-type
service:

1. Cluster admin confirms that initially `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets`
   is set on the LoadBalancer-type service managed by the IngressController.
2. The cluster admin upgrades OpenShift to v4.y and the service annotation is not
   changed or removed.
3. After upgrading, the IngressController will emit a `LoadBalancerProgressing` condition
   with `Status: True` because the spec's `Subnets` (an empty slice `[]`) does not equal
   the current annotation.
4. Instead of recreating the LoadBalancer-type service, the cluster admin will set
   `spec.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.providerParameters.aws.subnets` to the
   current value of the `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets` service.
5. The Ingress Operator will resolve the `LoadBalancerProgressing` condition back to
   `Status: False` as long as `Subnets` is equivalent to `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets`.

### API Extensions

> This proposal doesn't add any API extensions other than the `Subnets` new field proposed in

Author: Done.

This enhancement brings additional engineering complexity for upgrade
scenarios because cluster admins have previously been allowed to directly
add this annotation on a service. 

Debugging invalid subnets will be confusing for cluster admins and may
lead to extra support cases or bugs. By requiring service to be recreated,
it guarantees that the service won't be provisioned when invalid subnets
are provided, thus clearly indicating to the cluster admin that something
is wrong.

The design in [Effectuating Subnet Updates](#effectuating-subnet-updates)
requires a cluster admin to check the IngressController's status after
updating `Subnets` for instructions on how to proceed.

## Open Questions

- Do we need to configure subnets for default IngressController at cluster installation (i.e. Day 1 API)?
  - **Answer**: Yes. Service Delivery needs the ability to pick subnets for the default IngressController during
    installation for ROSA. However, this work is being done as a separate epic (https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CORS-3440),
    which includes redesigning the installconfig fields and deprecating the current `platform.aws.subnets` field.

>     We will address an installer API separate enhancement proposal.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    We will address an install-time API in a separate enhancement proposal.
```

Author: Done.

> - Should we create an alert for when the IngressController is in a `Progressing` status to enhance visibility to the
>   status described in [Effectuating Subnet Updates](#effectuating-subnet-updates)?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Should we create an alert for when the IngressController is in a `Progressing` status due to the inconsistency between between subnets as described in [Effectuating Subnet Updates](#effectuating-subnet-updates)?
```

Author: Done.

   `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets` on the LoadBalancer-type
   service, thus creating the load balancer with the desired subnets specified by the
   cluster admin.

#### Unmanaged Subnet Annotation Migration Workflow

Migrating an unmanaged `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets`
service annotation to `spec.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.providerParameters.aws.subnets`
after upgrading to 4.y doesn't require a cluster admin to delete the LoadBalancer-type
service:

1. Cluster admin confirms that initially `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets`
   is set on the LoadBalancer-type service managed by the IngressController.
2. The cluster admin upgrades OpenShift to v4.y and the service annotation is not
   changed or removed.
3. After upgrading, the IngressController will emit a `LoadBalancerProgressing` condition
   with `Status: True` because the spec's `Subnets` does not equal the current annotation.
4. Instead of recreating the LoadBalancer-type service, the cluster admin will set
   `spec.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.providerParameters.aws.subnets` to the

>    current value of the `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets` service.

Reviewer 3: I meant the case described above in "Updating an existing IngressController with new Subnets Workflow" chapter where the cluster admin is asked to delete the exposing service:

> 2. The Ingress Operator sets the `LoadBalancerProgressing` condition to `Status: True`
   on the IngressController and provides a message indicating to the cluster admin
   that they must delete the service.
   
Will the cluster admin be asked (via IngressController status) to add the subnets from the annotation to the spec field?

>    current value of the `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets` service.

Author: Yes there will still be a `LoadBalancerProgressing` status message, however, it won't exactly tell them to do this workflow, this is what it will say:

```
  - message: "The IngressController subnets were changed from [\"\"] to [\"subnetA\", \"subnetB\", \"subnetC\"]. To effectuate this change, you must delete the service: `oc -n openshift-ingress delete svc/custom-default`; the service load-balancer will then be deprovisioned and a new one created. This will most likely cause the new load-balancer to have a different host name and IP address from the old one's. Alternatively, you can revert the change to the IngressController: `oc -n openshift-ingress-operator patch ingresscontrollers/default --type=merge --patch='{\"spec\":{\"endpointPublishingStrategy\":{\"type\":\"LoadBalancerService\",\"loadBalancer\":{\"providerParameters\":{\"type\":\AWS\",\"aws\":{\"type\":\"Classic\",\"subnets\":[]}}}}}}'"
    reason: OperandsProgressing
    status: "True"
    type: LoadBalancerProgressing
```

The upgrade case (spec == `[]` and annotation == `<foo>`) is the same scenario as when a cluster admin clears/removes the subnets from the spec after setting the spec once. In that case, we do want them to delete and recreate the service. So the upgrade case isn't uniquely detectable.

The last part of the message:
```
Alternatively, you can revert the change to the IngressController: `oc -n openshift-ingress-operator patch ingresscontrollers/default --type=merge --patch='{\"spec\":{\"endpointPublishingStrategy\":{\"type\":\"LoadBalancerService\",\"loadBalancer\":{\"providerParameters\":{\"type\":\AWS\",\"aws\":{\"type\":\"Classic\",\"subnets\":[]}}}}}}'"
```
Will actually give them the exact command to set the spec back to the annotation. Though, yes, it might be super clear that that's what they should run.

I didn't add a specific message describe what to do if you are in a upgrade case, because technically we don't support unmanaged `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets` on the service. I think it could be confusing for these cluster admins upgrading with an unmanaged/unsupported annotation, but I was thinking they would probably figure it out by reading the status message. Worse comes to worse, they follow the instructions and delete their service, it removes their subnet annotation, and they do some research and find out we added the `Subnets` field.

Does that make sense? Yes, they will get a status message, but it won't exactly tell them how to do this workflow, but I don't necessarily feel strongly compelled to handle that since this is an unsupported situation.

>    current value of the `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets` service.

Reviewer 3: > So the upgrade case isn't uniquely detectable.

Right.

> The upgrade case (spec == [] and annotation == <foo>) is the same scenario as when a cluster admin clears/removes the subnets from the spec after setting the spec once. In that case, we do want them to delete and recreate the service.

So the user can't re-enable the auto discovery?

About the message:
1. It's for the case when the annotation has `"subnetA", "subnetB", "subnetC"` and the spec has empty list? Or the opposite?

> The IngressController subnets were changed from [\"\"] to [\"subnetA\", \"subnetB\", \"subnetC\"]

2. At the end the status message says to delete the service to proceed with the change:

> To effectuate this change, you must delete the service

>    current value of the `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets` service.

Author: > So the user can't re-enable the auto discovery?

They can indeed. They just have to delete and recreate the service any time they change the spec `Subnets`.

> It's for the case when the annotation has "subnetA", "subnetB", "subnetC" and the spec has empty list? Or the opposite?

In this message example, it's the case that the annotation was changed to `"subnetA", "subnetB", "subnetC"` and the spec has the empty list.

> At the end the status message says to delete the service to proceed with the change:

Correct. So going back to the update scenario, I agree this may be confusing for cluster admins that are using an unsupported annotation. But I don't feel strongly about changing the wording because it's an supported configuration, but I'm open to differing opinions. I think the main concern for handling unmanaged annotations was that we don't immediately break their clusters upon upgrade, which is satisfied.

>    current value of the `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets` service.

Reviewer 2: If it's unsupported it's probably better not to mention it all and tell them to manually remove the annotation before upgrading.

LoadBalancer-type service.

The `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets` annotation is used
for both CLBs and NLBs, hence adding it to `AWSLoadBalancerParameters` enables
common configuration for both.

While AWS, GCP, and Azure provide annotations for subnet configuration, AWS's
annotation accepts multiple subnets, whereas GCP and Azure only permit a
single subnet. For this reason, we made this API specific to AWS by adding
the configuration in `AWSLoadBalancerParameters`.

```go
// AWSLoadBalancerParameters provides configuration settings that are
// specific to AWS load balancers.
// +union
type AWSLoadBalancerParameters struct {
  [...]

  // subnets specifies the list of subnets for the load balancer to
  // route traffic to. The values can be either a subnet ID or name.
  // In order for the load balancer to be provisioned with subnets:
  // * Each subnet must exist.
  // * Each subnet must be from a different availability zone.
  // * The load balancer service must be deleted.
  //
  // When omitted, the subnets will be auto-discovered per availability zone.
  //
  // +optional
  // +openshift:enable:FeatureGate=IngressControllerLBSubnetsAWS

>   Subnets []string `json:"subnets,omitempty"`

Reviewer 4: Is there any validation we can apply for the format of the string here? A set of characters? A maximal length of the items within the list? A maximum length for the list itself?

I assume these values are just passed through to the label value unmodified?

Author: > Ah yea, we can do 256 since that is the limit of the tag value documented by https://docs.aws.amazon.com/tag-editor/latest/userguide/tagging.html. I'll add that.

Sorry, forgot to push. Just pushed now.

>   Subnets []string `json:"subnets,omitempty"`

Reviewer 4: Should the value here be immutable? That would show users they can't change it without a delete and recreate (`--force`) and would make it very obvious that the load balancer will be deprovisioned and reprovisioned as part of this change

That may mean you can skip the 2 step approach with manual deletion of the service

          subnets:
            - subnetA
            - subnetB
            - subnetC
status:
  availableReplicas: 2
  conditions:
  - message: Deployment has minimum availability.
    reason: MinimumReplicasAvailable
    status: "True"
    type: Available
  - message: "The IngressController subnets were changed from [\"\"] to [\"subnetA\", \"subnetB\", \"subnetC\"]. To effectuate this change, you must delete the service: `oc -n openshift-ingress delete svc/custom-default`; the service load-balancer will then be deprovisioned and a new one created. This will most likely cause the new load-balancer to have a different host name and IP address and cause disruption. To return to the previous state, you can revert the change to the IngressController: `oc -n openshift-ingress-operator patch ingresscontrollers/default --type=merge --patch='{\"spec\":{\"endpointPublishingStrategy\":{\"type\":\"LoadBalancerService\",\"loadBalancer\":{\"providerParameters\":{\"type\":\AWS\",\"aws\":{\"type\":\"Classic\",\"subnets\":[]}}}}}}'"
    reason: OperandsProgressing
    status: "True"
    type: LoadBalancerProgressing
```

We have intentionally designed this feature to require manual deletion of the

> service for the following reasons:

Reviewer 4: Do you have prior art of this? Are other changes requiring the same manual intervention? Is the user changing the configuration not an indication that they want the change to be effected at this point in time?

Author: We followed up in [Slack](https://redhat-internal.slack.com/archives/CE4L0F143/p1714145365629959?thread_ts=1711471549.819729&cid=CE4L0F143), but responding here for completeness.

I think these are valid points, but as I recently outlined in the `Alternatives` section, it sounds like the cons of doing immutability out weigh the pros, but I'll admit it's a bit of a wash.

for examples). Therefore, requiring manual service deletion provides a way
for the Ingress Operator to produce a clear signal to the cluster admin
that `Subnets` is invalid.

See [Invalid Subnet Annotation Values](#invalid-subnet-annotation-values) for
examples of invalid subnet annotation values.

##### Reason #2: To mitigate upgrade compatibility issues.

**Note**: Directly configuring the `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets`
on the LoadBalancer-type service is not supported and has never
been. However, this enhancement is designed to prevent cluster disruption upon
upgrading with this unsupported configuration.

If the `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets` annotation was
previously configured and the cluster is upgraded, the default value `[]` for
`Subnets` will clear the annotation for existing IngressControllers, which
would break cluster ingress. However, requiring the service to be deleted to effectuate
a `spec.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.providerParameters.aws.subnets`
value different from the current value of the annotation prevents this

> automatic removal of the service annotation on upgrade.

Reviewer 4: You want to have a distinction between "no opinion" and "I have an opinion, the list should be empty"? That can be achieved in the API if you were to make the API a pointer to a slice. When the field is not present in the serialized form the value will be nil, when the empty slice is present in the serialized form, that would create you a pointer to an empty slice.

Given that, you could handle the upgrade case without requiring the manual deletion.

Author: I responded in [Slack](https://redhat-internal.slack.com/archives/CE4L0F143/p1714141413339429?thread_ts=1711471549.819729&cid=CE4L0F143), but responding here for completeness.

Decision for use of pointer is moot to solve upgrade problem because we still either need immutability or delete-service-to-effectuate to solve the "updating the subnets after service is created doesn't work reliably issue". I think that should be the question we answer (and sounds like we are landing on delete-service-to-effectuate).

> **Note**: Cluster admins upgrading with an unmanaged subnet annotation don't

Reviewer 4: Would this cause the cluster to go degraded during upgrade?

Author: I suppose you mean Ingress reporting `Progressing: True` and not returning to `False` before upgrade is complete? I'm not certain. I asked about that:
https://redhat-internal.slack.com/archives/CEGKQ43CP/p1713654485381469

Author: [Sounds like it is not a problem](https://redhat-internal.slack.com/archives/CEGKQ43CP/p1713673031582929?thread_ts=1713654485.381469&cid=CEGKQ43CP):
> CVO hasn't cared about Progressing for a long time

But let me know if I misunderstood your concern.

Author: Followed up in [slack](https://redhat-internal.slack.com/archives/CE4L0F143/p1714145365629959?thread_ts=1711471549.819729&cid=CE4L0F143) and Miciah responded to this in another thread https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1595/files#r1573464583.

It's not optimal, but has precedent for other changes, specifically the mutable scope design for Ingress Controllers.

```

### Non-Existent Subnet Support Procedure

If a cluster admin has provided a subnet that doesn't exist in the `Subnets` field,
as discussed in [Invalid Subnet Annotation Values](#invalid-subnet-annotation-values),
the IngressController with have a status with a relevant error:

```yaml
  - lastTransitionTime: "2024-04-02T22:07:59Z"
    message: |-
      The service-controller component is reporting SyncLoadBalancerFailed events like: Error syncing load balancer: failed to ensure load balancer: expected to find 1, but found 0 subnets
      The kube-controller-manager logs may contain more details.
    reason: SyncLoadBalancerFailed
    status: "False"
    type: LoadBalancerReady
```

## Alternatives

### Automatically Recreating the Load Balancer

One alternative to requiring cluster admins to recreate the LoadBalancer-type
service, as described in [Effectuating Subnet Updates](#effectuating-subnet-updates),
is to have the Ingress Operator automatically delete and recreate the service.

While simpler in design, this approach could result in several minutes of unexpected
disruption to ingress traffic. A cluster admin might not anticipate that updating

> the Subnets field could cause disruption, leading to an unwelcome surprise.

Reviewer 4: If we make the field immutable and require a force update, that makes it clear to the admin no?

Author: Yep, it does it make it very clear that the Load Balancer needs to be deleted. But I'll refer to this [thread](https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1595/files#r1572193593) for the motivation.

Reviewer 4: The link isn't working for me to see the other thread, was the thread resolved?

Author: Sorry github is odd sometimes. Hopefully this link works: https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1595#discussion_r1573445995

It's the thread with:

> So I actually wrote this EP originally to make the IngressController immutable. Then David [suggested](https://redhat-internal.slack.com/archives/CE4L0F143/p1712258802900769?thread_ts=1711471549.819729&cid=CE4L0F143) a mutable design. Miciah [summarized](https://redhat-internal.slack.com/archives/CE4L0F143/p1712351558628299?thread_ts=1711471549.819729&cid=CE4L0F143) the motivation to go mutable quite well.

> My understanding why mutability is better:

### Immutability

Another alternative is to make the `Subnets` field immutable. This would require a
cluster admin to delete and recreate the IngressController if they wanted to update
the subnets.

The advantage of this approach is that the API Server would prevent any updates
to the `Subnets` field, clearly indicating to the cluster admin that they would 
need to recreate the IngressController. This is different from our current design,
as described in [Effectuating Subnet Updates](#effectuating-subnet-updates),
which is more subtle. With the current design, a cluster admin would need to check the

> IngressController's status after updating `Subnets` for instructions on how to proceed.

Reviewer 4: Odds on an admin applying the change and not looking at the status, and therefore thinking that they've effected the change but actually have not?

Author: I don't know if I can answer. I personally would review the status after an update. This status also makes `Progressing=True` for the Ingress Cluster Operator. That provides greater visibility than only a condition on the IngressController alone.

@Miciah can you comment on whether we reasonably expect a cluster admin to review status after an IC API update?

Reviewer: As Grant noted, the same workflow exists for mutating LB scope (internal/external), and the same risk exists that the cluster-admin will not think to check the ingresscontroller's status.  If we need to mitigate this risk, I suggest it be a separate enhancement.  (Maybe we just need an alert if the ingresscontroller has `Progressing=True` for more than a few minutes.)

Reviewer 2: +1 for an alert if `Progressing=True` and the status message indicates an incomplete transaction.

While the AWS Cloud Controller Manager (CCM) handles invalid annotations by
producing errors and events, it is difficult for the Ingress Operator to
decipher these CCM events _after_ the load balancer has been provisioned.
Therefore, the Ingress Operator can't indicate to a cluster admin that an
IngressController's load balancer is in a malfunctioning state (i.e., the
service is not getting reconciled) while the service is already provisioned.

When the IngressController is first created and the LoadBalancer-type
service is not yet provisioned, these same invalid `Subnets` values will
prevent the load balancer from being provisioned. The existing Ingress
Operator logic will clearly indicate to the cluster admin that the load balancer
failed to provision via the `LoadBalancerReady` status condition. In addition,
the `LoadBalancerReady` condition will include the CCM event logs that indicate
to the cluster admin that the `Subnets` value is invalid (see [Support Procedures](#support-procedures)
for examples). Therefore, requiring manual service deletion provides a way
for the Ingress Operator to produce a clear signal to the cluster admin

> that `Subnets` is invalid.

Reviewer 4: I actually think this is useful context and would encourage you to keep it. I'm coming to this conversation fresh today and would probably be asking many more questions if this section/paragraph were not here.

In general for enhancements we have to assume a minimal base knowledge so that they are accessible to everyone

See [Invalid Subnet Annotation Values](#invalid-subnet-annotation-values) for
examples of invalid subnet annotation values.

##### Reason #2: To mitigate upgrade compatibility issues.

**Note**: Directly configuring the `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets`
on the LoadBalancer-type service is not supported and has never
been. However, this enhancement is designed to prevent cluster disruption upon
upgrading with this unsupported configuration.

> 

Reviewer 2: I thought it was already stated elsewhere.  Not a big deal.

previously configured and the cluster is upgraded, the default value `[]` for
`Subnets` would clear the annotation for existing IngressControllers, which
would break cluster ingress. However, requiring intervention to effectuate
a `spec.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.providerParameters.aws.subnets`
value different from the current value of the annotation prevents this
automatic removal of the service annotation on upgrade.

**Note**: Cluster admins upgrading with an unmanaged subnet annotation don't
need to delete and recreate the service, instead they can follow the
[Unmanaged Subnet Annotation Migration Workflow](#unmanaged-subnet-annotation-migration-workflow).

##### Reason #3: The CCM Doesn't Reconcile NLB Subnets Updates after creation.

The CCM doesn't reconcile `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets`
annotation updates to NLBs once it has been created. However, requiring a service
deletion and recreation will effectuate these changes.

See [CCM Doesn't Reconcile NLB Subnets Updates](#ccm-doesnt-reconcile-nlb-subnets-updates)
for more details on why the CCM doesn't reconcile these updates.

### Install Config Proposal (Day 1)

> TODO: Install time configuration proposal

Reviewer 2: I strongly believe that you should remove the Day 1 references from all the places it shows in the EP and mention Day 1 in Open Questions, because it is an open item.

2. The Ingress Operator sets the `LoadBalancerProgressing` condition to `Status: True`
   on the IngressController and provides a message indicating to the cluster admin
   that they must delete the service.
3. The cluster admin deletes the LoadBalancer-type service indicated in the
   `LoadBalancerProgressing` condition message.
4. The Ingress Operator recreates the LoadBalancer-type service and configures the
   `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets` on the LoadBalancer-type
   service, thus creating the load balancer with the desired subnets specified by the
   cluster admin.

#### Unmanaged Subnet Annotation Migration Workflow

Migrating an unmanaged `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets`
service annotation to `spec.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.providerParameters.aws.subnets`
after upgrading to 4.y doesn't require a cluster admin to delete the LoadBalancer-type
service:

1. Cluster admin confirms that initially `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets`
   is set on the LoadBalancer-type service managed by the IngressController.
2. The cluster admin upgrades OpenShift to v4.y and the service annotation is not

>    changed or removed.

Reviewer 2: As far as I know, they won't be able to upgrade while the IngressController is the Progressing.

Reviewer 2: I may have misunderstood what is happening in step 1 - is it a thing to do or a thing to check?

3. After upgrading, the IngressController will emit a `LoadBalancerProgressing` condition
   with `Status: True` because the spec's `Subnets` (an empty slice `[]`) does not equal
   the current annotation.
4. Instead of recreating the LoadBalancer-type service, the cluster admin will set
   `spec.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.providerParameters.aws.subnets` to the
   current value of the `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets` service.
5. The Ingress Operator will resolve the `LoadBalancerProgressing` condition back to
   `Status: False` as long as `Subnets` is equivalent to `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets`.

### API Extensions

This proposal will modify the `IngressController` API by adding a new
field called `Subnets` of type `[]string` to the `AWSLoadBalancerParameters`

> struct type.

Reviewer 2: This is a duplicate, should be removed.

> TODO: What will install-time option modify?

Reviewer 2: Move to Open Questions

### Topology Considerations

#### Hypershift / Hosted Control Planes

> This enhancement is directly enabling the https://issues.redhat.com/browse/XCMSTRAT-545

Reviewer 2: Indirectly, by feature gate, to be precise.

feature for ROSA Hosted Control Planes.

#### Standalone Clusters

This proposal does not have any special implications for standalone clusters.

#### Single-node Deployments or MicroShift

This proposal does not have any special implications for single-node
deployments or MicroShift.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

> When an IngressController is created with

Reviewer 2: It would be better to see this entire section earlier in the doc instead of down here.  The workflows would have made better sense.

Author: I'm just using the template: https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/blob/da6500436b19e70f44834aff1b01f578b130862f/guidelines/enhancement_template.md

But I agree. I can move it up, but I know that will be painful to review if you like reviewing the GitHub deltas, so I'll do it in a separate push.

`spec.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.providerParameters.aws.subnets`
specified, the Ingress Operator will set the
`service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets` annotation
on the LoadBalancer-type Service.

However, if `spec.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.providerParameters.aws.subnets`
is updated on an existing IngressController, the Ingress Operator will NOT
update `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets` until the
cluster admin deletes the LoadBalancer-type service as indicated by the
`LoadBalancerProgressing` status (see [Effectuating Subnet Updates](#effectuating-subnet-updates)).
When the Ingress Operator recreates the LoadBalancer-type service, it will
then configure `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets` with
the new `Subnets` value.

The `status.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.providerParameters.aws.subnets`

> will always reflect the _actual_ subnet value by being mirroring the value of

Reviewer 2: Is this what you meant?
```suggestion
will eventually reflect the _actual_ subnet value by mirroring the value of
```

`service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets` on the service. We

> anticipate that cluster admins may have added an unmanaged

Reviewer 2: I wouldn't mention the unsupported option unless it adds meaning here.  I think this paragraph is supposed to point out that the `spec` and `status` may not look synchronized with the unsupported service annotation.  If so, it could use a little wordsmithing.

Author: > I wouldn't mention the unsupported option unless it adds meaning here.

This was added per Miciah's request https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1595#discussion_r1552520873.

> I think this paragraph is supposed to point out that the spec and status may not look synchronized with the unsupported service annotation. If so, it could use a little wordsmithing.

The purpose of this paragraph is to say "the status should mirror the annotation, not the spec". I attempted to rewrite into a list to make it clearer.

Reviewer: The EP absolutely should call out considerations such as a cluster-admin's use of an unsupported option given that the platform didn't prevent the cluster-admin from using it.  Some customers assume that if OpenShift lets them do it, then it's supported.  Ideally, we should block the use of unsupported configuration or block upgrades of clusters with unsupported configuration, but failing that, we should make a reasonable effort not to break clusters that have unsupported configuration.

> `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets` annotations, hence

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets` annotation, hence
```

the status will reflect unmanaged subnet annotations. Additionally, when a cluster
admin updates the `Subnets` spec, the `Subnets` status won't immediately reflect that
change, as explained in [Effectuating Subnet Updates](#effectuating-subnet-updates).

Note that this status usage is consistent with the approach in [LoadBalancer Allowed Source Ranges](/enhancements/ingress/lb-allowed-source-ranges.md),
but diverges with [Ingress Mutable Publishing Scope](/enhancements/ingress/mutable-publishing-scope.md).
The mutable publishing scope design set `status.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.scope`
to the initial value of `spec.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.scope` so that it could
detect when the spec for `Scope` changed. Therefore, `status.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.scope`
may not always reflect the actual scope of the load balancer. This proposal for `Subnets`
perpetuates the pattern of ensuring that `status.endpointPublishingStrategy` reflects the
_actual_ value (in our case, the annotation value).

#### Install Time Configuration

> TODO

Reviewer 2: Add to Open Questions

### Risks and Mitigations

#### Invalid Subnet Annotation Values

One type of risk is if the `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets`
annotation is configured with invalid subnets. In this situation, the AWS Cloud
Controller Manager (CCM) will throw an error and not reconcile the service. 

This means that if a service is created (or recreated) with an invalid annotation,
the load balancer will not be provisioned. If an existing service has an invalid
annotation added, any future updates to the service will remain unreconciled until
the invalid subnet is fixed.

The following are examples of invalid values that can cause an error in the AWS CCM:

1. Multiple Subnets in Same Availability Zone (AZ)
2. Non-Existent Subnets
3. Replacing All Subnets (disjoint union) in a Classic Load Balancer (CLB)

Since #1 and #2 can occur during service creation, they remain valid risks.
See [Support Procedures](#support-procedures) for how to debug #1 and #2.

> However, we have completely mitigated #3 by requiring services to be recreated

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, we have completely mitigated #3 by requiring services to be deleted
```

Author: Done.

upon updating `Subnets` (see [Effectuating Subnet Updates](#effectuating-subnet-updates)).
See the next section, [Replacing All Subnets in a CLB](#replacing-all-subnets-in-a-clb)
for more details on #3.

##### Replacing All Subnets in a CLB

If an update to the list of subnets in `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets`
would completely replace the existing subnets on an existing service
using a CLB, the AWS CCM will throw an error and not reconcile the service.
As outlined in this [GitHub comment](https://github.com/kubernetes/cloud-provider-aws/issues/249#issuecomment-906595623),
a new set of subnets causes the AWS controller attempts to detach all
existing subnets on CLBs which is not a supported operation.

A cluster admin wanting to replace all subnets would need to delete and
recreate the LoadBalancer-type service. It may not be obvious that to the cluster
admin that they are replacing all subnets because they must be aware of which

> subnets are currently used by the load balancer. This includes automatically
> selected subnets when NOT using `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets`.

Reviewer 2: If this is true?
```suggestion
subnets are currently used by the load balancer. For example, if the subnets were automatically
selected subnets they are not listed anywhere.
```

Author: Yea that's a fair, the cluster admin doesn't know which subnets they are using. Done.

> As mentioned above, to mitigate this we are requiring services to be recreated

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As mentioned above, to mitigate this we are requiring services to be deleted
```

Author: Done.

upon updating `Subnets` as outlined in [Effectuating Subnet Updates](#effectuating-subnet-updates).

#### CCM Doesn't Reconcile NLB Subnets Updates

As long as the subnets in the annotation are valid, CLBs can update subnets
after creation. However, the same is not true for NLBs. Once a NLB is created
by the CCM, any updates to the `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets`

> annotation will be validated, but annotation will NOT impact the subnets on
> the NLB. The [ensureLoadBalancerv2](https://github.com/openshift/cloud-provider-aws/blob/51180c32ceb70298faad1aac1022d8983fdf2e78/pkg/providers/v1/aws_loadbalancer.go#L146)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
annotation will be validated, but will not be propagated to
the NLB. The [ensureLoadBalancerv2](https://github.com/openshift/cloud-provider-aws/blob/51180c32ceb70298faad1aac1022d8983fdf2e78/pkg/providers/v1/aws_loadbalancer.go#L146)
```

Author: Done.

function responsible for provisioning NLBs lacks the logic to update NLB
subnets after provisioning.

Requiring services to be recreated upon updating `Subnets` as outlined in
[Effectuating Subnet Updates](#effectuating-subnet-updates) will mitigate
cluster admins from experiencing this issue.

### Drawbacks

This enhancement brings additional engineering complexity for upgrade
scenarios because cluster admins have previously been allowed to directly
add this annotation on a service. 

Debugging invalid subnets will be confusing for cluster admins and may
lead to extra support cases or bugs. By requiring service to be recreated,
it guarantees that the service won't be provisioned when invalid subnets
are provided, thus clearly indicating to the cluster admin that something
is wrong.

The design in [Effectuating Subnet Updates](#effectuating-subnet-updates)
requires a cluster admin to check the IngressController's status after
updating `Subnets` for instructions on how to proceed.

> Requiring the cluster admin to delete and recreate the LoadBalancer-type

Reviewer 2: I would put this at the top, it is the worst drawback.
```suggestion
Requiring the cluster admin to delete the LoadBalancer-type
```

Author: Yes I agree. Done.

for the workflow for this user story.

#### Installing a Private Cluster with Private Subnets in AWS

_"As a cluster admin, when installing a private cluster in AWS, I want to
specify that the default IngressController should use private subnets, so
that it is not exposed to the public Internet."_

When a cluster admin installs a private cluster into a VPC also containing
public subnets lacking the proper tags, internal LoadBalancer-type services
may inadvertently use both the public and private subnets, unknowingly introducing
a security risk (see related [RFE-2816](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/RFE-2816) and
[OCPBUGS-17432](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OCPBUGS-17432)).

As a workaround to this type of issue, cluster admins may want to specify the private
subnet list to ensure that the default IngressController exclusively uses the private
subnets.

See [Setting IngressController Subnets during Installation Workflow](#setting-ingresscontroller-subnets-during-installation-workflow)
for the workflow for this user story.

### Goals

- Introduce a new field in the IngressController API for subnet selection in AWS.

> - Support an install-time (Day 1) configuration for subnet selection of the default

Reviewer 5: cc @patrickdillon @r4f4

changes in [Ingress Mutable Publishing Scope](/enhancements/ingress/mutable-publishing-scope.md), we've chosen to extend
its usage to support the `Subnets` fields. The auto-delete annotation is not intended for end-users to use directly, but
instead for configuration management tooling.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

When an IngressController is created with
`spec.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.providerParameters.aws.subnets`
specified, the Ingress Operator will set the
`service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets` annotation
on the LoadBalancer-type Service.

However, if `spec.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.providerParameters.aws.subnets`
is updated on an existing IngressController, the Ingress Operator will NOT
update `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets` until the
cluster admin deletes the LoadBalancer-type service as instructed by the
`LoadBalancerProgressing` status (see [Effectuating Subnet Updates](#effectuating-subnet-updates)).
When the Ingress Operator recreates the LoadBalancer-type service, it will
then configure `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets` with

> the new `Subnets` value.
> 
> The only exception is if the `ingress.operator.openshift.io/auto-delete-load-balancer`

Reviewer 2: nit: this belongs with the previous paragraph.
```suggestion
the new `Subnets` value.  The only exception is if the 
`ingress.operator.openshift.io/auto-delete-load-balancer`
```

Author: Yep I think I went back and forth on this. Done.

annotation is set on the IngressController, in which case the operator automatically deletes
the service and effectuates the subnet update.

The `status.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.providerParameters.aws.subnets`
will eventually reflect the configured subnet value by mirroring the value of
`service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets` on the service. There are
two scenarios in which the `Subnets` status won't be equal to the `Subnets` spec:

> 1. The cluster admin manually configured the `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets`

Author: Done.

   annotation on the service.
2. The cluster admin configured the IngressController's `Subnets` spec, but hasn't
   effectuated the change by deleting the service (see [Effectuating Subnet Updates](#effectuating-subnet-updates)).

This proposal's use of `status.endpointPublishingStrategy` is consistent with the approach in
[LoadBalancer Allowed Source Ranges](/enhancements/ingress/lb-allowed-source-ranges.md),
but diverges with the approach in [Ingress Mutable Publishing Scope](/enhancements/ingress/mutable-publishing-scope.md).
The Ingress Mutable Publishing Scope design sets `status.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.scope`
equal to `spec.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.scope`, which may not always reflect the actual scope of the
load balancer. This proposal for `Subnets` ensures `status.endpointPublishingStrategy` reflects the _actual_ value

> (in our case, the annotation value).

Reviewer 2: If this is true?
```suggestion
(in our case, the value of `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets` on the Service).
```
If that's not true, I still don't understand what the _actual_ value is here.

Author: You are correct, that's the annotation I am talking about. Updated.

  `spec.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.providerParameters.aws.subnets` specified.
2. The ingress operator creates the LoadBalancer-type Service and sets the
   `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets` annotation with the subnets
   provided by the user.

#### Updating an existing IngressController with new Subnets Workflow

Updating an existing IngressController with new subnets requires the service
to be deleted and is disruptive:

1. A cluster admin edits an IngressController's
   `spec.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.providerParameters.aws.subnets` field.
2. The Ingress Operator sets the `LoadBalancerProgressing` condition to `Status: True`
   on the IngressController and adds status a message directing the cluster admin
   to delete the service.
3. The cluster admin deletes the LoadBalancer-type service indicated in the
   `LoadBalancerProgressing` condition message.
4. The Ingress Operator recreates the LoadBalancer-type service and configures the
   `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets` on the LoadBalancer-type
   service, thus creating the load balancer with the desired subnets specified by the
   cluster admin.

> #### Automatically Updating an existing IngressController with new Subnets Workflow

Reviewer 2: nit: This should be referenced in the user stories section, like the other workflows.

Author: Good point - I have been linking a user story to workflows. Done.

A cluster admin can add the `ingress.operator.openshift.io/auto-delete-load-balancer`

> annotation to update the subnets without requiring them to manually delete the service:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
annotation to update the subnets without requiring manual deletion of the service:
```

Author: Done.

repository.

E2E tests will cover the following scenarios:

- Creating an IngressController with `Subnets` and observing
  `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets` on the LoadBalancer-type Service.
- Updating an IngressController with new `Subnets`, deleting the
  LoadBalancer-type service, and observing `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets`
  (as described in [Updating an existing IngressController with new Subnets Workflow](#updating-an-existing-ingresscontroller-with-new-subnets-workflow)).
- Directly configuring `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets` on the
  LoadBalancer-type service and setting `Subnets` on the IngressController while observing
  `LoadBalancerProgressing` transitioning back to `Status: False` (as described in
  [Unmanaged Subnet Annotation Migration Workflow](#unmanaged-subnet-annotation-migration-workflow)).
- Creating a IngressController with the `ingress.operator.openshift.io/auto-delete-load-balancer`
  annotation, updating an IngressController with new `Subnets`, and observing the service
  get automatically deleted and recreated with `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets`

>   configured to the new `Subnets`.

Reviewer 2: It would be interesting to see what happens when you haven't used the auto-delete annotation, but then add it afterward.  Does it do the deletion if you haven't added the annotation ahead of time?

Author: Yup just tried this out in a real cluster to confirm.

If you add the auto-delete annotation after updating the subnets, it will immediately delete the service when you add the auto-delete annotation:

1. Updating the IngressController's annotation triggeres a reconcile.
2. The reconcile will run the [ensureLoadBalancerService](https://github.com/openshift/cluster-ingress-operator/blob/13a29ff4029823bbd4a06924843fbe4cba9fba0a/pkg/operator/controller/ingress/controller.go#L1078) function
3. The [updateLoadBalancerService](https://github.com/openshift/cluster-ingress-operator/blob/13a29ff4029823bbd4a06924843fbe4cba9fba0a/pkg/operator/controller/ingress/load_balancer_service.go#L581) will now see the auto-delete annotation as well as the need to recreate the LB and it will do so immediately. 

This was how Miciah designed in when implementing https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/blob/master/enhancements/ingress/mutable-publishing-scope.md.

---
title: lb-subnet-selection-aws
authors:
  - "@gcs278"
reviewers:
  - "@candita"
  - "@frobware"
  - "@rfredette"
  - "@alebedev87"
  - "@miheer"
  - "@JoelSpeed, for review regarding CCM"
approvers:
  - "@Miciah"
api-approvers:
  - "@deads2k"
creation-date: 2024-03-06

> last-updated: 2024-04-10

Reviewer 2: Reminder to update the last-updated.

configure specific subnets for AWS load balancers. By default, AWS auto-discovers
the subnets, with logic to break ties when there are multiple subnets for a particular
availability zone. This proposal works by configuring the
`service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets` annotation on the
LoadBalancer-type service, followed by a deletion of the service at a time when
disruption can be tolerated.

In addition, this enhancement will also provide an install-time configuration for Day 1
operations by extending the OpenShift install-config API. The install-config API will
provide the ability to configure specific subnets for all IngressControllers, including
configuring the default IngressController's subnets.

## Motivation

Cluster admins on AWS may have dedicated subnets for their load balancers due to
security reasons, architecture, or infrastructure constraints. 

Currently, cluster admins can configure subnets by manually adding the
`service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets` annotation to the
service exposing the IngressController. However, this approach does not
allow deploy-time subnet configuration and is unsupported because the

> service is managed by Ingress Operator.

Reviewer 2: nit: this doesn't really explain why it is unsupported.  Does this mean that Ingress Operator will revert the changes, or something else?

}

// AWSSubnetReference is a reference to an AWS subnet. It can be either
// be a subnet ID or name.
// +kubebuilder:validation:MaxLength=256
type AWSSubnetReference string
```

#### Effectuating Subnet Updates

If a cluster admin updates the `Subnets` field on an existing IngressController,
the Ingress Operator doesn't effectuate this change automatically. Instead, the
Ingress Operator sets the `LoadBalancerProgressing` condition to `Status: True`
provides a message indicating to the cluster admin that they must delete the service.

```yaml
apiVersion: operator.openshift.io/v1
kind: IngressController
metadata:
  name: custom
  namespace: openshift-ingress-operator
spec:
  replicas: 2
  domain: mycluster.com
  endpointPublishingStrategy:
    type: LoadBalancerService
    loadBalancer:
      scope: External
      providerParameters:
        type: AWS
        aws:
          type: Classic
          subnets:
            - subnetA
            - subnetB
            - subnetC
status:
  availableReplicas: 2
  conditions:
  - message: Deployment has minimum availability.
    reason: MinimumReplicasAvailable
    status: "True"
    type: Available

>   - message: "The IngressController subnets were changed from [\"\"] to [\"subnetA\", \"subnetB\", \"subnetC\"]. To effectuate this change, you must delete the service: `oc -n openshift-ingress delete svc/custom-default`; the service load-balancer will then be deprovisioned and a new one created. This will most likely cause the new load-balancer to have a different host name and IP address and cause disruption. To return to the previous state, you can revert the change to the IngressController: `oc -n openshift-ingress-operator patch ingresscontrollers/default --type=merge --patch='{\"spec\":{\"endpointPublishingStrategy\":{\"type\":\"LoadBalancerService\",\"loadBalancer\":{\"providerParameters\":{\"type\":\AWS\",\"aws\":{\"type\":\"Classic\",\"subnets\":[]}}}}}}'"

Reviewer 2: Can you add line breaks so the message shows up in its entirety without scrolling?

IngressController's load balancer is in a malfunctioning state (i.e., the
service is not getting reconciled) while the service is already provisioned.

When the IngressController is first created and the LoadBalancer-type
service is not yet provisioned, these same invalid `Subnets` values will
prevent the load balancer from being provisioned. The existing Ingress
Operator logic will clearly indicate to the cluster admin that the load balancer
failed to provision via the `LoadBalancerReady` status condition. In addition,
the `LoadBalancerReady` condition will include the CCM event logs that indicate
to the cluster admin that the `Subnets` value is invalid (see [Support Procedures](#support-procedures)
for examples). Therefore, requiring manual service deletion provides a way
for the Ingress Operator to produce a clear signal to the cluster admin
that `Subnets` is invalid.

See [Invalid Subnet Annotation Values](#invalid-subnet-annotation-values) for
examples of invalid subnet annotation values.

##### Reason #2: To mitigate upgrade compatibility issues.

**Note**: Directly configuring the `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets`

> on the LoadBalancer-type service is not supported and has never
> been. However, this enhancement is designed to prevent cluster disruption upon

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
on the LoadBalancer-type service is not supported and never has 
been. However, this enhancement is designed to prevent cluster disruption upon
```

[Unmanaged Subnet Annotation Migration Workflow](#unmanaged-subnet-annotation-migration-workflow).

##### Reason #3: The CCM Doesn't Reconcile NLB Subnets Updates after creation.

The CCM doesn't reconcile `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets`
annotation updates to NLBs once it has been created. However, requiring a service
deletion will effectuate these changes.

See [CCM Doesn't Reconcile NLB Subnets Updates](#ccm-doesnt-reconcile-nlb-subnets-updates)
for more details on why the CCM doesn't reconcile these updates.

### Install Config Proposal (Day 1)

TODO: Install time configuration proposal

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

When an IngressController is created with
`spec.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.providerParameters.aws.subnets`
specified, the Ingress Operator will set the
`service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets` annotation
on the LoadBalancer-type Service.

However, if `spec.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.providerParameters.aws.subnets`
is updated on an existing IngressController, the Ingress Operator will NOT
update `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets` until the

> cluster admin deletes the LoadBalancer-type service as indicated by the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
cluster admin deletes the LoadBalancer-type service as instructed by the
```

`LoadBalancerProgressing` status (see [Effectuating Subnet Updates](#effectuating-subnet-updates)).
When the Ingress Operator recreates the LoadBalancer-type service, it will
then configure `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets` with
the new `Subnets` value.

The `status.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.providerParameters.aws.subnets`

> will eventually reflect the _actual_ subnet value by mirroring the value of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
will eventually reflect the configured subnet value by mirroring the value of
```

`service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets` on the service. There are
two scenarios in which the `Subnets` status won't be equal to the `Subnets` spec:

1. The cluster admin manually configured the `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets`
   annotation on the service.
2. The cluster admin configured the IngressController's `Subnets` spec, but hasn't
   effectuated the change by deleting the service (see [Effectuating Subnet Updates](#effectuating-subnet-updates)).

> Note that this status usage is consistent with the approach in [LoadBalancer Allowed Source Ranges](/enhancements/ingress/lb-allowed-source-ranges.md),

Reviewer 2: "status usage" is not defined.  Maybe just say:
```suggestion
Note that updating the status with admin instructions is consistent with the approach in [LoadBalancer Allowed Source Ranges](/enhancements/ingress/lb-allowed-source-ranges.md),
```

Author: Sorry, I took this update, but was incorrect. This isn't what this paragraph was explaining.

This isn't about the pattern of "admin instruction" `status.conditions`, this is about the `status.endpointPublishingStrategy`, which is an un-standardized field structure where past developers have been populating using 2-3 different patterns. Some `status.endpointPublishingStrategy` fields mean it's the "default", some mean it's what was set when the IngressController was first created, some means it's the 'effective' value.

We are trying to perpetuate the last one: `status.endpointPublishingStrategy` == effective value. No consistency is confusing for cluster admins, as they can't consistency interpret `status.endpontPublishingStrategy`. It also is confusing for developers debugging `status.endpontPublishingStrategy`. Miciah and I discussed this and he asked me add this paragraph to this EP.

I can see the confusion now. Let me refactor this to make it more clear that I am talking about `status.endpointPublishingStrategy`.

but diverges with [Ingress Mutable Publishing Scope](/enhancements/ingress/mutable-publishing-scope.md).
The mutable publishing scope design set `status.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.scope`
to the initial value of `spec.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.scope` so that it could
detect when the spec for `Scope` changed. Therefore, `status.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.scope`
may not always reflect the actual scope of the load balancer. This proposal for `Subnets`

> perpetuates the pattern of ensuring that `status.endpointPublishingStrategy` reflects the

Reviewer 2: Is it perpetuating the pattern of the previous sentence?  You lost me.

Reviewer 2: I would give the pattern a good short name, like "triggered consistency", or something like that.

Author: This pattern I'm describing here doesn't really involve "triggered consistency".

This pattern is that: `status` == the effectuated value (i.e. the `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets` in our case). 

This is a generic concept of how to keep our IngressController's status consistent, regardless if the effectuated value is triggered or delayed by having the cluster admin do something.

I think we have to spell this concept verbosely out here.

Reviewer 2: I think you already gave it a name, the Load Balancer Allowed Subnets approach.  That works, since it is defined above.

Author: Sorry for the confusion. I explained in https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1595#discussion_r1591678677 too.

This isn't about the "Load Balancer Allowed Subnets approach" this is about maintaining consistency with the values in `status.endpointPublishingStrategy`. I see the confusion, and I'll refactor to make this clearer.

_actual_ value (in our case, the annotation value).

#### Install Time Configuration

> TODO

Reviewer 2: This is a repeat of "Install Config Proposal (Day 1)".

### Workflow Description

#### Setting IngressController Subnets during Installation Workflow

Setting the default subnets for all IngressController during installation (Day 1):

TODO: Workflow for install time configuration

#### Creating a Custom IngressController with Subnets after Installation Workflow

Creating an IngressController while specifying the subnets for the LoadBalancer-type
service after installation:

1. A cluster admin creates an IngressController with
  `spec.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.providerParameters.aws.subnets` specified.
2. The ingress operator creates the LoadBalancer-type Service and sets the
   `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets` annotation with the subnets
   provided by the user.

#### Updating an existing IngressController with new Subnets Workflow

Updating an existing IngressController with new subnets requires the service
to be deleted and is disruptive:

1. A cluster admin edits an IngressController's
   `spec.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.providerParameters.aws.subnets` field.
2. The Ingress Operator sets the `LoadBalancerProgressing` condition to `Status: True`

>    on the IngressController and provides a message indicating to the cluster admin
>    that they must delete the service.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   on the IngressController and adds a status message directing the cluster admin
   to delete the service.
```

   `LoadBalancerProgressing` condition message.
4. The Ingress Operator recreates the LoadBalancer-type service and configures the
   `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets` on the LoadBalancer-type
   service, thus creating the load balancer with the desired subnets specified by the
   cluster admin.

#### Unmanaged Subnet Annotation Migration Workflow

Migrating an unmanaged `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets`
service annotation to `spec.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.providerParameters.aws.subnets`
after upgrading to 4.y doesn't require a cluster admin to delete the LoadBalancer-type
service:

1. Cluster admin confirms that initially `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets`
   is set on the LoadBalancer-type service managed by the IngressController.
2. The cluster admin upgrades OpenShift to v4.y and the service annotation is not
   changed or removed.
3. After upgrading, the IngressController will emit a `LoadBalancerProgressing` condition
   with `Status: True` because the spec's `Subnets` (an empty slice `[]`) does not equal
   the current annotation.

> 4. Instead of recreating the LoadBalancer-type service, the cluster admin will set
>    `spec.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.providerParameters.aws.subnets` to the
>    current value of the `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets` service.

Reviewer 2: Is it true that they could either delete the service or fix the controller subnets?  If so, I would keep it simple and say:
```suggestion
4. The cluster admin can either delete the service as usual, OR they may manually set
   `spec.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.providerParameters.aws.subnets` to the
   current value of the `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets` service.  This is the only time this manual operation is recommended.
```

Reviewer 2: Ok, I misunderstood because of the "Instead of recreating the ..service", which definitely shouldn't be done.  Maybe just:
```suggestion
4. In this case,  the cluster admin must directly update
   `spec.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.providerParameters.aws.subnets` to the
   current value of the `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets` service.
```

Author: Done.

5. The Ingress Operator will resolve the `LoadBalancerProgressing` condition back to
   `Status: False` as long as `Subnets` is equivalent to `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets`.

### API Extensions

> This proposal doesn't add any API extensions other than the new field proposed in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This proposal doesn't add any API extensions other than the new `subnets` field proposed in
```
